Rainbows and Rage: A Comprehensive History of the Pride Flag
The first pride flag was this 8 stripe rainbow, designed by Gilbert Baker in 1978:
 
It was intended to be a symbol to celebrate the diversity of the LGBTQ+ community and be representative of queer pride. The main symbol used at the time was the pink triangle, which had been reclaimed from its use by Nazis to be used in activism, first in Germany, but popularised by the American Silence = Death poster. The idea with the rainbow flag was to have something with a more positive background: created by queer people, for queer people. In Gilbert Baker's words "We needed something beautiful, something from us." (Interview with MoMA).
There is quite a lot of hidden symbolism behind the colours. Many different sources say different things about why the symbol of a rainbow was chosen, some of them being: its associations with nature, the Bible story about it, and the hippie movement. Rainbows have been used as symbols throughout history and continue to be used outside of the LGBTQ+ community (the NHS!), so the choice of a rainbow comes with many different connotations, with most of them being positive. The colours also all have individual meanings: pink – sex/sexuality, red - life, orange - healing, yellow - sunlight, green - nature, turquoise – magic/art, indigo - serenity, violet - spirit

I could write an entire essay on Gilbert Baker, but the main points are that he was a 27-year-old war veteran and a drag queen. He didn't have any experience in designing flags but was encouraged by some of his activist friends (notably Harvey Milk). Creating the first two flags took a team of around 30 people, who hand sewed and dyed them at the San Francisco Gay Community Centre. They were first raised on June 25th, 1978, in the United Nations Plaza. 
[If you want to learn more about the inspiration behind the first flag, there is quite a lot of information here: https://gilbertbaker.com/.]
But how did this 8-stripe version evolve into the 6 stripes that we use today? It was obvious from the start that some of the colours would need to be cut, so that the flags could be produced on a larger scale at a cheaper cost, which was necessary when demand grew after Harvey Milk’s assassination. The pink colour was chosen to be dropped due to shortages of pink fabrics/dyes. The turquoise was also removed for the 1979 Pride Parade on Market Street, so that the flag could have an even number of colours and be split in half across the road.
In my opinion, more people should use this flag, because the reasons for its changes are made entirely obsolete by the widespread use of technology (most pride flags are digital, so dyes are irrelevant) and it is a beautiful way to honour the history of pride as well as the intentions behind the creation of the flag. One of the modern problems with the current rainbow flag is its heavy commercialisation. Rainbow capitalism allows large companies to profit of off LGBTQ+ people, and gain respect for being “inclusive” or “supportive”, without them actually having to help queer people (donating to charities/inclusive workplace policies etc.), and in some cases while actively hurting queer people. Gilbert Baker was entirely against this, especially since many rainbow flags and other pride products are made in unethical working conditions, or in countries which do not has sufficient LGBTQ+ rights. I think that people should be more aware of this problem, and it would be nice if people actively tried to handmake pride items, or support small queer-owned businesses, before turning to give money to corporations who do not really care about queer rights. Modern usage of this flag is largely by people who know the origin (it is generally called the Gilbert Baker flag), so it is often safe to assume they are using it with good intentions.

One development that did not gain much attention, but that I do feel is important here, is the Victory Over AIDS Flag:
 
There doesn’t seem to be any consensus about who made this flag or when exactly it was used (possibly the 1980s??), but a story attached to it, which may or may not be true, is that Leonard Philip Matlovich, a gay war veteran, suggested that when a cure for HIV/AIDS was discovered, then people could cut the black stipes off their flags and ceremoniously burn them in Washington DC. 
The relevance of this flag is that in the later Progress Pride flag, a black stripe is used to represent people who died from AIDS.

The Philadelphia Flag is possibly one of the most used variations of the rainbow flag, aside from the Progress Flag, which it probably partially inspired.
 
It added black and brown stripes to highlight racism within the LGBTQ+ community and was designed as part of a collaboration between Philadelphia's Office of LGBT Affairs and the company Tierney. It was the first change to the rainbow flag to be "officially" recognised but it is also extremely controversial. 
In my opinion, it is a great flag to highlight the importance of intersectionality within the queer community and useful in its own right, however it should not be used in any way to replace the original rainbow. This is not a huge problem with this specific flag, but it is a problem with the Progress Flag, which this flag set a precedent for.
Another issue is the "officialness" of these changes, which really contrasts to the creation of the original flag. The involvement of a company like Tierney also seems to play into rainbow capitalism, as I believe they were paid to create the flag. It is possible that this flag it was created with good intentions, but it is also possible that it was created performatively to avoid making any real changes.

The Progress Flag, created in 2018 by Daniel Quasar is arguably the most popular and controversial iteration of the rainbow pride flag.
 
The aim of the flag was to emphasise that there is still progress which needs to be made with LGBTQ+ rights, especially within marginalised communities. The chevron pointing right is meant to represent the idea of forward progress and the colours of it represent marginalised communities within the LGBTQ+ community: white, pink and blue from the trans flag, and black and brown inspired by the Philadelphia flag to symbolise BIPOC. The black also represents people who have died from/are living with HIV/AIDS, although this is often forgotten, since the black in the Philadelphia flag did not symbolise it.
I don’t like this flag. Even though I believe it was created with good intentions, its execution and use unfortunately do not reflect those intentions. Firstly, it is incredibly ugly; the colour combinations just do not work, and it is ultimately lazy – there are no new concepts presented in this, it just combines ideas from other flags. A key design issue with the chevron, other than the poor design, is that it visually segregates trans people and BIPOC (A few people have attempted to redesign the flag to solve this issue and I will discuss that later). This is problematic, as it implies they were never included in the first place, and completely ignores the intersection between identities (note that the creator is nonbinary, but xe is also white [As am I, so my perspective is likely limited so bear that in mind…] Additionally, highlighting specific identities, although important, automatically excludes others. This is demonstrated by the developed version of this on the next page.
By itself it is not horrible, and the message it coveys is important, but it seems to be treated by many people as a replacement for the plain rainbow, which, in my opinion, is not the correct attitude. Similar to other variations, it has its place, but should not be promoted as better or more correct than any other variations.
Another major issue with this flag is its association with rainbow capitalism, despite Quasar’s claims to be entirely against it. For example, it has played a key role in at least one (Quasar only mentions 2021 on xir website) of Target’s infamous Pride Collections. Although this widespread use is arguably good, as it shows that the message of inclusion is fairly well accepted and understood, companies such as Target will immediately stop promoting inclusion when it becomes unprofitable or controversial. (Keeping with this example, Target has chosen to remove certain items of their 2023 Pride Collection, because of transphobia and homophobia from customers, both online and in person, many of whom have threatened the company). 

In 2021, the flag was updated by Valentino Vecchietti to include intersex people: (apologies for the stretched image!)
 
This addition is fascinating to me, because it so clearly reveals one of the Progress Flag's main issues, and rather than solving it, it contributed to the problem. The Progress Flag aims to highlight trans and BIPOC experiences, but when it is used as a replacement for the original rainbow, that automatically excludes anyone else. This soon turns into a competition of who is the "most oppressed" and deserving of a space on the main flag, which is altogether an unproductive discussion to have, only serving to further divide the queer community. This flag proposed that intersex people were one these "most oppressed" groups and added them, making the question: “why aren't [insert minority identity] group of people on the flag?”, a reasonable one to ask. (Ohio Flag Meme) Intersex is also an interesting choice, because, although some intersex people do identify as being queer, not all of them consider intersex to be a queer identity. It also somehow makes it uglier?!?! This is genuinely so confusing to me, because I get the intention of the Progress Flag, and I get how the creator came to the design that it is, but this addition makes absolutely no sense, and furthermore, lots of people seem to have adopted it? I think it is because it is seen as the “most inclusive” and people just don’t question that. 
I am probably being unreasonably harsh on this flag. It is by no means the worst I have seen and overall it is fine I guess, but it definitely shouldn’t be the main flag that people use.

My criticism of the Progress flag would be useless unless I provided an alternative so here is a flag similar in design and similar in sentiment that aims to solve the problems the Progress Flag presents - The New Pride Flag by Julia Feliz (which I mentioned earlier!):
 
[To read the full story behind this (which I really recommend!), you can visit the website -  The New Pride Flag.] The website describes it better than I ever could. Again, it is not aesthetically perfect, but it is really just a response to the Progress Flag, so it is not really meant to be.

I now get to discuss my all-time favourite flag – the 9-stripe Diversity Flag by Gilbert Baker (2017):
 
This doesn’t really have an official name, and it is extremely rarely used; if someone is using this, they are either absolutely confident in their intentions, or completely lost. The stripes hold the same meaning as in the original flag and the added lavender stripe represents diversity. Gilbert Baker designed and published this just a few weeks before his death, which is likely why it was never popularised. He may have also handsewn and dyed several versions of it (articles are unclear and most focus on his death), one of which is pictured below:
 
This redesign was also explicitly political, and Gilbert Baker said that it was in response to Donald Trump being president. 
Lavender is a symbolic colour because of its historic associations with the queer community, specifically queer men during the Victorian period, because it was seen as effeminate. Since then, it has been used in many places, such as with ‘Lavender Marriages’, ‘Lavender Menace’, and the ‘Lavender Scare’. It works well here, because it already has a meaning, but is used to represent something new, showing progress, while appreciating history in a way the Progress flag never could. It is probably not a good alternative to the Progress flag because its meaning cannot be as easily ascertained from the colours, but it is really cool otherwise and more people should definitely use it. (I also don’t really know how to explain this, but it has the same kind of charged use that using the word ‘queer’ does in certain situations. Probably that it has origins in being political and radical and continues to be used as such. It is a very intentional choice to demonstrate your beliefs and focus on inclusivity, in comparison to the Progress Flag, which is sort of the default for many people??)

